	The Earthquake

	Portola Point, California, is a lovely town on the Pacific Coast, north of Los Angeles. It got its name from Gaspar de Portola, a Spanish explorer who explored the Pacific Coast in the 18th century. When he came to southern California, several peaceful American Indian peoples lived there. One of these was the Chumash people. During the 19th century the Spanish and American settlers took the land away from them and built roads, towns and cities. The last members of the Chumash went to live on a small reservation near Portola Point.

	Bill and Michelle Martin and their family arrived at Portola Point in March. They came from Montego Bay, Florida. Bill was a tall, handsome boy of seventeen with brown hair and blue eyes. Basketball was his sport and he played on the Portola High team. He loved science and wanted to become a biologist.

	His sister, Michelle, was a pretty girl of sixteen, with red hair and blue eyes. She played volleyball on the school team and wanted to become a journalist.

	Their father worked for an airline and in March he was transferred from Miami international Airport to Los Angeles International Airport.

	It was hard for Bill and Michelle to leave their friends at Montego Bay, but they often sent them emails and called them. They liked their new school, Portola High, and made friends there.

	Our story begins in July, a hot, sunny month in southern California. School was over, and Bill and Michelle were enjoying their summer vacation in their new home.

	"Well, today's the big day!" said Bill. "July third!"

	"Yeah, in two hours we'll see Nick again!" said Michelle happily.

	"What time is his plane landing?" asked Mrs Martin, a friendly woman of about forty.

	"At a quarter past eleven," said Bill.

	"The guest room is ready for him, and I hope you have a great vacation together," said Mrs Martin. "It's almost time to drive to the airport."

	Nick Chan was one of Bill's best friends at Montego Bay, and he was coming to spend the month of July with the Martins. Nick was a Chinese-American boy of seventeen and a good basketball player. He loved animals and wanted to become a vet.

	Nick's plane arrived on time and the three friends were together again.

	"It's great to see you, Nick!" said Bill excitedly.

	"We're going to have a wonderful July!" said Michelle.

	"Thanks for inviting me," said Nick, smiling at Mrs Martin and his two friends.

	"How's Rover?" asked Bill. Rover was Nick's dog.

	"Oh, he's fine. He always wants to play," said Nick.

	When they got back to Portola Point, Bill, Michelle and Nick spent the day talking and laughing together. They were in the garden when they suddenly felt everything moving around them.

	"What's happening?" cried Nick. "Everything's moving!"

	"Oh, no!" cried Bill. "It's an earthquake!"

	"Another earthquake!" cried Michelle, who was scared. The three friends looked at each other - their faces were white. They didn't know what to do. Nick's glass of juice fell off the garden table to the ground.

	Then suddenly the earthquake stopped.

	"This is the third earthquake in two months!" said Michelle.

	"The last one damaged several new houses in Coyote Canyon. That's where the expensive homes are. And they're building more there."

	"The small cracks in our kitchen wall are from the first earthquake in May," said Bill.

	"And the big, long crack in my bedroom is from the earthquake last month," said Michelle. "I covered it with a poster of U2."

	"Well, this is my first California earthquake," said Nick, who was a bit nervous.

	"Southern California is a beautiful place, but we're right on top of the San Andreas Fault," said Bill. "There are lots of earthquakes in California, and scientists say a big one is coming, but they don't know when."

	"Gee...," said Nick, worried, "I read about the San Andreas Fault in my science book but you guys live right on it."

	Suddenly everything started shaking again for about five seconds.

	"It's an aftershock," said Bill, looking at Nick and Michelle nervously. "Let's hope these earthquakes stop before tomorrow."

	"Yeah," said Michelle, "tomorrow's the Fourth of July, and there's a big parade, a western rodeo and a barbeque."

	"You'll see some real American Indians from the Chumash Reservation in the parade," said Bill.

	"Sounds like fun!" said Nick, trying to forget about the earthquake.

	The next day was the Fourth of July, one of America's most important holidays. It was another hot, sunny day and everything in town was ready for the parade. Red, white and blue decorations and American flags were everywhere. The parade was the first event of the morning, followed by the town barbeque at Blue River Park and the western rodeo. Music, dancing and fireworks were part of the evening program.

	Bill, Michelle and Nick had a big breakfast with fruit juice, eggs, toast, jam and milk before going to see the parade.

	"Dad and I are coming to see the parade a bit later," said Mrs Martin, who was reading the morning paper. "We'll see you at the barbeque. Have fun!"

	"Thanks for the great breakfast, Mrs Martin!" said Nick.

	"Thanks, mom!" said Michelle, running out of the door with Bill and Nick.

	There was a crowd of people on Main Street who wanted to see the parade. It started with the marching band of Portola High School with twelve majorettes in colorful uniforms. They were followed by the mayor of Portola Point, Carlos Rodriguez. He rode in a big car with other important men. The sheriff and his men followed on their horses. Then came a group of men dressed like George Washington, Benjamin Franklin and other patriots of the American Revolution of 1776.

	"Here they come," said Bill, pointing towards the Town Hall. "Most of them come from cattle ranches in the Ventura Mountains." There were about thirty cowboys on their horses and they rode slowly down Main Street.

