	Chapter three

	The Ghost Warrior

	"Tell me about the old Chumash cemetery and Mr Richardson," said Nick, as they walked to the barbeque at Blue River Park.

	"Oh, you won't believe it, Nick," said Bill. "People at Coyote Canyon say that on nights when there's a full moon they see an American Indian warrior. He has a black horse and gallops through the canyon. They think he's a ghost and they're scared!"

	"The ghost of an American Indian warrior?" asked Nick, surprised.

	"Yeah," said Michelle, "and some people want to sell their new homes!"

	"I'm sure Mr Richardson isn't very happy about that," said Nick.

	"No," said Bill, "but he continues building there."

	"He and his wife live at Coyote Canyon," said Michelle.

	"Have they ever seen the ghost of the warrior?" asked Nick, laughing.

	"No one knows," said Michelle. "But I'm sure Luke Langley's happy that Wild Wolf spoke at the parade this morning. He's the other builder in town and he isn't selling any of his new homes. People prefer to buy in Coyote Canyon because there's a beautiful view of the Ventura Mountains."

	"Hi, guys!" said a tall, pretty girl with black hair, dark eyes and glasses.

	"Hi, Pam!" said Michelle. "Pam Rivers, this is Nick Chan, our best friend from Montego Bay."

	"Happy to meet you, Nick," said Pam, smiling.

	"Me, too!" said Nick. "Bill and Michelle said you're an American Indian."

	"Yes, I am," said Pam. "My grandfather, grandmother and uncle live on the reservation, but I don't. My Uncle George has a riding stable with a lot of horses. People go there to ride and he gives horseback riding lessons too. It's the only business on the reservation and a lot of Chumash work there."

	"A riding stable!" said Nick. "I love horses."

	"I'm glad you do," said Pam. "You can come and visit one day."

	"Thanks, I will," said Nick.

	"Did you hear Wild Wolf speak at the parade?" asked Bill.

	"Yes, I did," said Pam sadly. "The older Chumash are very upset about the homes at Coyote Canyon. They believe the earthquakes are a sign from the Great Spirit. They're afraid there will be stronger earthquakes and other disasters. Our ancestors are buried at Coyote Canyon."

	"The Chumash are right," said Michelle. "There's a lot of land behind the canyon. Mr Richardson can go and build there."

	"Wild Wolf is chief of the reservation," said Pam, "and two years ago he and my Uncle George went to talk to the mayor about this problem. At that time Mr Richardson wanted to buy the land at Coyote Canyon."

	"What did the mayor say?" asked Nick.

	"He listened but he didn't do anything," said Pam. "The people on the reservation protested in front of the Town Hall several times - the mayor and Mr Richardson are good friends."

	"Gee, I'm sorry about that," said Nick. "I can understand your people. My parents come from China and traditions are important to them."

	"I'm glad you understand, Nick." She smiled at her new friend. "Now, let's go and get something to eat. Everything smells good at this barbeque."

	"Yeah," said Bill, "Look at those steaks!"

	The four friends enjoyed the food and talked to other people they knew. The rodeo started late in the afternoon and it was an exciting show. Cowboys from all over California rode bucking broncos and bulls.

	"How can the cowboys stay on those bucking broncos?" asked Nick.

	"It takes years of practice," said Pam.

	That evening everyone went to Blue River Park to listen to live music, dance and watch the beautiful fireworks.

	Jacob Richardson did not go to the celebration at Blue River Park because he was angry. He stayed at home with his wife and they had dinner in their big garden. It was a warm, silent night and they talked together until about eleven o'clock.

	"Those Chumash are going to make a lot of trouble for me, Meg," he said nervously.

	"What are you going to do?" asked Meg Richardson.

	"I'm going to talk to Rodriguez on Monday," he said. "I have to stop them."

	"Oh, Jacob," said Meg, "please listen to my advice - stop building there! The Chumash are very angry. Try and understand them. There's a lot of good land behind the canyon."

	"Coyote Canyon is the best place, Meg, and I'm not stopping!" said Jacob Richardson.

	"What's that noise?" asked Meg, turning around to look at the tall trees at the back of the garden.

	"It sounds like... a horse," said Jacob getting up and looking at the trees. In the distance he saw a rider on a black horse, holding a spear. He had long black hair, and his face and body had war paint. His horse had war paint too.

	Meg Richardson screamed, "The ghost warrior!"

	The warrior galloped towards Jacob Richardson, lifted his long spear and threw it at him. The spear hit him in the heart and he fell to the ground. The warrior galloped away into the night.

	"Jacob! Jacob!" cried his wife, running to her husband, who was already dead. She was terrified and for a moment she couldn't move. She stared at the long spear in her husband's heart.

	"Jacob, say something to me!" she cried. She took her cell phone and immediately called an ambulance.



	Chapter four

	The Chumash Reservation

	Early the next morning the Ventura County sheriff and his men were at Meg Richardson's home. They started investigating the murder.

	"Mrs Richardson, what do you remember about the murderer?" asked Sheriff Pedro Lopez, who was a tall man of about thirty with dark hair.

	Mrs Richardson was very upset and her voice was shaking. "It was dark, but the garden lights were on. He had long black hair and he was dressed like a warrior with war paint on his face and body. His horse had war paint too. At first I thought it was the ghost warrior... but he was real!"

	"How old do you think he was?" asked the sheriff.

	"I don't know" said Meg. "It was difficult to see his face because he had war paint on and I was scared. But I don't think he was old."

	"Was he riding the horse with a saddle?" asked the sheriff.

	"Oh, I don't remember clearly," she replied.

	"Do you have any neighbors?" asked the sheriff.

	"My closest neighbor is about half a mile away," said Meg sadly.

	A good-looking man walked into Mrs Richardson's garden.

	"Mrs Richardson," said the sheriff, "this is Professor Daniel Massey from Ventura University. He's the head of the Department of Native American Studies at the university. He's an expert on Californian Native Americans and he recently published a book about them. He'll study the spear that killed your husband. It could help us find the murderer."

	"How do you do, Mrs Richardson," said Professor Massey quietly. "I'm very sorry about your husband, but I'm here to help you in every way."

	Professor Massey was a tall, well-dressed man of about forty, with a tan.

	He was bald, had blue eyes and wore glasses. He was a good friend of Wild Wolf and George Rivers at the reservation. He put on special gloves, picked up the spear and examined it carefully. The spear had designs and three black feathers on top.

	"This is a Chumash spear - look at the red and white lines and circles. The three black feathers are the sign of death," said Professor Massey.

	"A Chumash spear!" exclaimed Sheriff Lopez. "Then this is a Chumash murder. Let's drive to the reservation and look around."

	That morning Bill, Michelle and Nick heard about the Richardson murder on the radio.

	"What a terrible way to die!" said Michelle.

	"Horrible!" said Bill. "Yesterday the old Chumash was very angry and perhaps he decided to kill Richardson."

	"Oh, I don't know," said Nick. "The radio said 'a middle-aged American Indian warrior with long black hair. Perhaps a Chumash'."

	"The radio said he was riding his horse with a saddle," said Michelle. "That's strange because American Indian warriors ride bareback."

	"Michelle," said Bill, "are you trying to solve another mystery?"

	"Is this going to be another Peter O'Nell case?" asked Nick.

	"Well, we helped the Miami Police solve the O'Nell case, with Rover's help," said Michelle. "I think we're very good detectives!"

	"And we agree," said Bill and Nick.

	The doorbell rang and it was Pam.

	"Hi, guys!" said Pam. "Did you hear about the Richardson murder?"

	"Yeah, we heard about it on the radio this morning," said Michelle.

	"Terrible, isn't it?" said Pam. "Now the sheriff thinks a Chumash was the murderer. No one at the reservation liked Richardson but no one wanted to kill him. The Chumash are peaceful people."

	"Please don't worry, Pam," said Bill.

	"Hey, it's almost half past ten," said Michelle. "We don't want to miss the bus to the reservation."

	When they got to the reservation they went to the riding stable. Outside the stable they saw the sheriff's car and a big black jeep with a personalized license plate.



	Chapter five

	War Paint

	"Hi, Uncle George!" said Pam. "These are my friends Bill and Michelle Martin, and Nick Chan. Can we show them the stable and the horses?"

	"Happy to meet you," said Uncle George. He was a big man of about forty with long black hair, a silver necklace and friendly dark eyes.

	"Welcome to our reservation! Come with me and we'll visit the stable. The sheriff and his men are here too, they're looking at the horses." Suddenly his eyes became sad; he was worried.

	They entered the big stable and saw a sign on the wall: RIDING LESSONS ON TUESDAY, THURSDAY AND SATURDAY at 10 am and 4 pm. Some people were cleaning the horses and the stable, and others were getting ready to ride.

	"This is interesting," said Nick, "a western stable with horses! Can I take some pictures?"

	"Sure!" Uncle George laughed and gave Nick, Bill and Michelle some sugar cubes. "Here, you can give them to the horses. They love sugar cubes - it's a good way to make friends with a horse."

	"Follow me," said Pam. "I want to show you Ginger, a beautiful Arabian stallion and my favorite horse. He loves sugar cubes."

	When they left the stable they saw the sheriff and Professor Massey talking with Uncle George.

	"We'll come back later today," said Sheriff Lopez. "Professor Massey wants to check something at the university." The sheriff got into his car and drove away.

	Professor Massey smiled at Uncle George and said, "Don't worry, George, we're just checking a few things."

	"Dan," said Uncle George, "we're old friends, you know me and my people, we're not murderers! Wild Wolf said a lot of strange things and he didn't like Richardson, but he didn't kill him."

	"George," said Dan Massey, "I believe you. Today the sheriff's going to talk to Luke Langley. Langley hated Richardson, and everyone knows that - he never even talked to him. Richardson was his biggest competitor. No one wants to buy Langley's houses. He had a good reason to kill Richardson."

	Uncle George and Massey talked for a few minutes, and then Massey got into his jeep and drove away.

	"Oh - that cool jeep belongs to the professor!" said Nick.

	"And he has a personalized plate too," said Michelle. "Those plates are expensive. He's a cool guy."

	After lunch Pam took her friends to visit the Chumash Museum. Before leaving the reservation they went back to the stable.

	"Look, the sheriff's back again," said Bill.

	"And he's talking to my uncle," said Pam. "Let's sit outside and listen."

	"George," said the sheriff, "we think the horse of the Richardson murder comes from your stable. We found some war paint on several horses."

	"Of course," said George Rivers calmly, "we put war paint on the horses yesterday morning before the parade. And yesterday evening we washed most of it off."

